BookIt — versioned agreements, the way Hireup does it

  server.js            → repository root
  public/index.html    → public/ folder
  forms/               → the folder from the earlier zip, if you haven't
                         already put it up

Then:  sudo bookit-update


I HAD THIS WRONG, AND YOUR SCREENSHOTS SHOWED WHY

I said Hireup's service agreement "isn't collected as a signed form at all".
They have one, they publish every version of it, and each account records the
one it accepted with the date. Versions 2 through 5, back to 2018, each with
the date range it was current. That's a better model than I gave them credit
for, and it exposed a real defect in what I shipped you an hour ago.


THE DEFECT

Replacing a blank form deleted the file it replaced:

    if (filePath && filePath !== next) { try { fs.unlinkSync(filePath); } catch {} }

So the moment you put up a new Service Agreement, every participant who had
already agreed held a record pointing at a document that no longer existed.
"They agreed" is a claim about a document. If the document is gone, the claim
can't be checked, and the acceptance record is worth less than the paper it
replaced.

Nothing is ever unlinked now. Not on replace, not on remove.


WHAT CHANGED

1. VERSIONS, KEPT
   Every blank carries a version number and a "current from" date, both set
   when you put it up. Replacing one archives the version it replaces — file
   and all — and increments the number. Taking one down archives it too.

   The admin row shows "Version 3 · current from 04/03/2027 · 3 versions",
   and that last bit opens the history: every version, its date range, and a
   link to read it.

2. A VERSION NUMBER, NOT A TIMESTAMP
   The acceptance used to record the blank's file modification time. That
   changes when you fix a typo, which is not the same event as the terms
   changing, and it's not a thing anyone can say out loud. It now records
   "v2, current from 01/01/2027".

3. THE PARTICIPANT HAS AN AGREEMENTS LIST
   Same shape as the Agreements page in your second screenshot: what they
   agreed to, which version, the day they did it, and a link that opens THAT
   version — not whatever is current now.

4. YOU CANNOT AGREE TO A DOCUMENT THAT DOESN'T EXIST
   Photo and media consent has no blank on the shelf, and the old build let
   someone "agree" to it anyway, recording "no version on file". That's a
   record of a click and nothing else. The button is gone until there is text
   to read, and the route refuses with: "We haven't published Photo and media
   consent yet, so there is nothing to agree to."


TESTED — the case that matters
  participant A agrees                             version 1
  the office uploads a replacement, from 01/01/2027 version 2
  participant B agrees                             version 2
  A opens "read the version I agreed to"           v1, 200, 82 KB, still there
  B opens hers                                     v2, 200
  history                                          v2 current, v1 until
                                                   22/08/2026, both with files
  agreeing to an unpublished document              refused
  npm run check                                    20/20, security scan clean
