Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd | Feedback and Complaints Summary

Purpose

At Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd we are committed to providing high-quality services and supports to all our participants. We value feedback and consider complaints as valuable opportunities to improve our services and address any concerns promptly and effectively. Our complaints management system aims to ensure transparency, accountability, and a participant-centred approach in handling feedback and complaints.

This summary should be read in conjunction with our Feedback and Complaints Policy, which provides further information on the policies, procedures and principles that guide our complaints management system.

Right to access advocates

As part of our commitment to empowering participants, we acknowledge your right to access advocates or support persons during the feedback or complaints process. You have the freedom to involve a trusted advocate to assist you in expressing your concerns or seeking resolutions. Please let us know and Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd will cooperate and facilitate arrangements for advocates and representatives. If you need to access an advocate, the Disability Advocacy Network Australia (dana.org.au) lists services relevant to your state.

How to make a complaint

At Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd, we foster a culture that encourages open communication, allowing individuals to voice their concerns or provide negative feedback without fear of adverse consequences, retribution or loss of service. Your complaints are valuable, and we value your input as they help us understand your needs and expectations better. You can also choose to make your complaint anonymously.

By addressing your concerns, we can continuously improve the quality of services we provide, benefiting not only you but also others who may face similar issues. Your complaints will be handled professionally, and we are committed to reaching a resolution that satisfies your expectations. Whether you choose to make the complaint directly to us or through the NDIS Commission, we are here to listen and respond appropriately to address your concerns.

If you wish to make a complaint anonymously, you can do so through the feedback and complaints form on this site, by post to the address below, or by choosing an advocate who can contact us on your behalf.

How to make a complaint to Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd

We encourage you to share your concerns or complaints with us directly if you feel comfortable doing so, as this approach often leads to a quicker resolution of the issue. A person can make a complaint to Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd:

- in person;
- by email to hello@thecareweb.com.au;
- by telephone on 0488 114 368;
- through the feedback and complaints form on this site; or
- by post to 16 Crystal Crescent, Wyong NSW 2259.

To ensure effective handling and documentation of your complaint, we ask you to use our Feedback and Complaints Form for all written complaints.

How to make a complaint to the NDIS Commission

A complaint can be made to the NDIS Commission by:

- phoning 1800 035 544 (free call from landlines) or TTY 133 677; interpreters can be arranged;
- the National Relay Service, asking for 1800 035 544; or
- visiting ndiscommission.gov.au and completing a complaint contact form.

The NDIS Commission can take complaints about services or supports that were not provided in a safe and respectful way, or that were not delivered to an appropriate standard.

Approval Authority: Supriya Thapa
Version: 1
Approval Date: August 2025
Review Date: August 2027
