Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd | Management of Medication Policy

Introduction

Purpose

The purpose of this Policy is to establish guidelines and procedures for the safe and effective management of medication for individuals receiving support and services from Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd. This Policy aims to ensure that medications are managed in a manner that prioritises the health, wellbeing and safety of individuals, while adhering to legal and regulatory requirements, and in compliance with the Management of Medication NDIS Practice Standard.

Scope

This Policy is applicable to all Workers affiliated with Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd. It is the responsibility of every individual, regardless of their employment status, to fully comprehend and comply with the commitments outlined in this policy. All Workers must acknowledge that they have read, understood and will comply with the contents of this Policy.

NDIS Indicators (Objectives)

- Records clearly identify the medication and dosage required by each participant, including all information required to correctly identify the participant and to safely administer the medication.
- All workers responsible for administering medication understand the effects and side-effects of the medication and the steps to take in the event of an incident involving medication.
- All medications are stored safely and securely, can be easily identified and differentiated, and are only accessed by appropriately trained workers.

Policy Statement

Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd is committed to ensuring each participant requiring medication is confident their provider administers, stores and monitors the effects of their medication and works to prevent errors or incidents.

Relevant legislation

All relevant legislation to this Policy is outlined in the Legislation Register.

Related documents

- Medication Plan and Administration Form
- Medication Competency Assessment
- Medication Consent Form
- Medication Incident Report Form
- Medicine Register

Responsibilities and Roles

Supriya Thapa is responsible for the development and review of this policy. It is expected that Supriya Thapa ensures this Policy remains compliant with all applicable laws, regulations and standards.

Key Management Personnel play a vital role in ensuring the effective implementation of this Policy throughout Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd. It is the responsibility of all Key Management Personnel to not only assist Workers in understanding and complying with this policy but also to comply with it themselves. By leading by example, they demonstrate the importance of adherence to the policy and foster a culture of compliance within the organisation.

Workers are responsible for understanding the contents of this policy and complying with all procedures applicable to them.

Definitions

Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd means Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd ABN 19658578575.

Director means Supriya Thapa.

Worker means a permanent, fixed term or casual member of staff, a contractor or volunteer employed or otherwise engaged by Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd and includes the Director.

Procedures

Participants self-administering and managing their own medications

If a Participant is able to manage and administer their own medication, Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd will support them to do so.

Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd will acquire a Consumer Medicines Information (CMI) sheet for any prescribed medication from the participant's prescribing doctor. Additionally, Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd will ensure the retrieval of current information during every medication review or medication plan assessment.

The Director may require written advice speaking to the Participant's competency to self-administer. The written advice can be provided by the Participant's representative or medical practitioner.

Participants who self-administer medication will have appropriate supervision by Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd's Workers, who will document and record the Participant's administration of medication.

Regular review of a Participant's ongoing capacity to self-administer their medicines will be conducted when there is a change to their health, cognitive status, or physical ability. Assessment for self-administration should include the following:

- The person's choice and right to make their own decision.
- Involvement of the Participant's family or representative.
- Whether self-administration will be a risk to themselves or other people.
- Whether they can take the correct dose of their own medicines at the right time and in the right way, considering the Participant's cognitive ability, physical ability and health literacy.
- How the Participant's medicines will be managed during periods of acute illness.
- The Participant's ability to comply with the safe and appropriate storage of self-administered medicines.

Participants unable to self-administer and manage their own medications

With the consent of the Participant, Workers will provide assistance to the Participant as per the agreed-upon assistance (prompt, assist, administer). Workers will be appropriately trained to ensure their skills, knowledge and understanding of medication administration is sufficient.

Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd will acquire a Consumer Medicines Information (CMI) sheet for any prescribed medication from the participant's prescribing doctor, and will ensure the retrieval of current information during every medication review or medication plan assessment.

Medication administration

If a Participant has been assessed as being unable to self-administer and manage their own medication, the Participant Support Plan must contain clear instructions and the physical assistance and supervisory role the staff will take in the administration of medications.

All medications must be administered strictly in accordance with the instructions provided by the prescribing medical practitioner or as specified by the manufacturer, when applicable. These instructions should be recorded accurately on the appropriate medication chart.

Staff administering medication must ensure:

- the right medication is being administered;
- the medication is being administered to the right person;
- the right dose is being administered;
- the medication is being administered at the right time;
- the right route and administration method is being used as prescribed; and
- the right documentation is being completed.

Staff administering medication must also respect the Participant's right to refuse their medication, and document a refusal in the Medication Incident Report Form. Staff must monitor the Participant for any adverse reactions after each administration of medication.

Prohibited Practices

Staff must not administer any medication that is not prescribed in accordance with this Policy, including over-the-counter medication.

Staff should not administer medication to a Participant who clearly objects to it in an informed manner, unless there is an approved protocol in place that allows for such administration.

Administration of medications to Participants must be carried out in a manner that prioritises the preferences and needs of the Participant, rather than being solely for organisational convenience.

Staff must never leave medications of any kind unattended in an area where they can be accessed by Participants or unauthorised individuals. Proper supervision and control must be maintained to ensure the security and safety of all medications.

Storage of Medication

Medications will be stored in their original containers or pharmacy-issued dose administration aids, in a cool (preferably below 25°C) and dry place, according to the manufacturer's instructions or the consumer medicines information (CMI) leaflet.

Medications will be stored securely, locked away, and out of reach of children. They will be stored separately from food items and other chemicals to prevent cross-contamination. Where necessary, appropriate storage containers will be used for transporting medications.

Medication Disposal

Medication must be disposed of safely and in a manner that is not harmful to the environment. See Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd's Waste Management Policy for guidance on the appropriate disposal method.

No medications are to be kept by Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd as stock, or to be used for another Participant. Any Participant's medication should be returned to the Participant at the end of the medication plan.

Medication training

All Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd staff involved in assisting or supporting Participants with their medication management will have the relevant skills and competency to provide appropriate and safe support. All staff must hold current first aid qualifications.

Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd will ensure staff are provided with annual training, incorporating:

- safe medication administration;
- recording and monitoring of medication;
- safe storage and disposal of medication;
- prevention of errors or incidents; and
- effects, side effects, and potential adverse reactions of medication.

Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd will acquire a Consumer Medicines Information (CMI) sheet for any prescribed medication from the participant's prescribing doctor. This document will provide detailed participant-specific and medication-specific information regarding safe medication administration, storage requirements, as well as the effects, side effects, and potential adverse reactions associated with the medication. Where this is urgent, emergency services will be contacted.

Schedule 8 Medications (Controlled Drugs)

Schedule 8 (S8) medications are classified under the Poisons Standard as controlled drugs due to their high potential for abuse and dependence. When assisting or administering S8 medications, Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd must comply with state and territory legislative requirements, including accurate documentation, secure storage, and restricted access. These medications must be stored in a locked cabinet or safe that meets legislative security standards and must be recorded in a designated controlled drug register each time they are administered, received, or disposed of.

Two staff members, where possible, should be present to witness and co-sign the administration and disposal of any S8 medication. Only Workers who have received specialised training and have been assessed as competent may handle S8 medications. Any discrepancy in count or suspected misuse must be immediately reported to Supriya Thapa and managed in accordance with the Incident Management Policy and relevant regulatory obligations.

Reporting

Where staff have any concerns or questions about a Participant's medication management, they must report to Supriya Thapa, who will obtain professional advice from the participant's prescribing doctor, or an allied health professional, for guidance or to address concerns.

Medication-related incidents, such as medication refusal, errors or misuse, should be reported in accordance with Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd's Incident Management Policy and Procedures.

Policy review and updates

This Policy is to be amended and updated according to the requirements to comply with the applicable law.

Approval Authority: Supriya Thapa
Version: 1
Approval Date: August 2025
Review Date: August 2027
