Disability and Mental Health Care Pty Ltd | Mealtime Risk Assessment Checklist

Part 1. Participant, worker and measurements

Participant details

- Name, date of birth, gender and address
- Has this checklist been completed before? If so, the date
- Does the participant have any food allergies? If yes, the allergy and reactions

Worker details

- Name and position, and the date the checklist is completed

Weight and height information

- Current weight without shoes, in kilograms, and the date weighed
- Weight change over the past 3 months (kilograms gained or lost), and whether weight records exist for the past 3 months
- Current height (measured standing and without shoes), in centimetres, and the date measured

Part 2. Nutrition and Swallowing Risk Checklist

Each question is answered Yes, No, or Unsure / Don't know. The explanations beneath each question help complete the checklist.

Question 1. If the person is a child (under 18 years), have they lost weight or failed to gain weight over the last 3 months? You will need weight records to answer this question accurately.

Question 2. Is the person underweight? Tick Yes if they are an adult and their weight on the Weight for Height Chart is in the very underweight range, or when you look carefully at the person (adult or child), their bone structure is easily defined under their skin — this can indicate significant loss of fat tissue and is easily checked by looking around the eyes and cheeks, and also the shoulders, ribs and hips.

Question 3. Has the person had unplanned weight loss or have they lost too much weight? Tick Yes if their weight loss is undesirable or has been unexpected; they are under 18 years and there is any weight loss in two or more consecutive months; or they have lost weight in two or more consecutive months and are not on a monitored weight loss program.

Question 4. Is the person overweight? Tick Yes if they are an adult and their weight on the Weight for Height Chart is in the overweight or obese range, or they (adult or child) appear to have rolls of body fat, for example around the abdomen.

Question 5. Has the person had unplanned weight gain or have they gained too much weight? Tick Yes if their weight gain is undesirable or has been unexpected, or they are not on a weight gain program and their clothes no longer fit.

Question 6. Is the person receiving tube feeds? Tick Yes if the person is receiving naso-gastric, naso-duodenal or gastrostomy feeding.

Question 6a. If you answered Yes to question 6, does the person also receive food or drink through the mouth? Tick Yes if they receive any food or drink by mouth, in addition to tube feeding. If the person is receiving tube feeds and no other food by mouth, then answer only questions 10, 13, 14, 16, 18 and 19.

Question 7. Is the person physically dependent on others in order to eat or drink? Tick Yes if the person cannot put food or drink into their own mouth and someone else is needed to feed them.

Question 8. Has the person had a reduction in appetite or food or fluid intake? Tick Yes if they are not eating or drinking as much as they usually do and this is unintentional, or they appear unwilling to take most food offered to them and the equivalent of 6 large glasses of fluid each day.

Question 9. Does the person follow, or are they supposed to follow, a special diet? Tick Yes for any of the following dietary plans: puree, minced, chopped or soft foods; thickened fluids; weight reduction or weight-increasing; low fat; vegetarian; low cholesterol or cholesterol-lowering; diabetic; or any other diet which modifies or restricts foods or food choices.

Question 10. Does the person take multiple medications? Tick Yes if they are usually on more than one type of medication.

Question 11. Does the person select inappropriate foods or behave inappropriately with food? Tick Yes if any of the following apply: they are a picky eater or refuse to eat some food groups, making a balanced diet impossible; they over-consume alcohol or coffee, tea and cola drinks; they eat non-food items such as dirt, grass or faeces; they drink excessive amounts of fluid; they steal or hide food.

Question 12. Does the person usually exclude foods from any food group? Tick Yes if the person usually excludes all foods from one or more of the following groups: bread, cereals, rice, pasta, noodles; vegetables, legumes; fruit; milk, yogurt, cheese; meat, fish, poultry, eggs, nuts, legumes.

Question 13. Does the person get constipated? Tick Yes if their bowel movements are irregular, painful and sometimes infrequent, or laxatives, suppositories or enemas are required to maintain regular bowel movements.

Question 14. Does the person have frequent fluid-type bowel movements?

Question 15. Does the person have mouth or teeth problems that affect their eating? Tick Yes if teeth are loose, broken or missing; the lips, tongue, throat or gums are red and inflamed or ulcerated; or they have a malocclusion (upper and lower teeth do not meet) and this affects their ability to chew.

Question 16. Does the person suffer from frequent chest infections, pneumonia, asthma or wheezing? Tick Yes if they have had frequent chest infections or pneumonia; they are usually chesty or have difficulty clearing phlegm; or they have asthma or wheeze.

Question 17. Does the person cough, gag and choke or breathe noisily during or after eating food, drinking, or taking medication? Tick Yes if they sometimes cough or choke during or several minutes after eating, drinking or taking medication; their breathing becomes noisy after eating or drinking or while talking; or they gag on eating, drinking or taking medication.

Question 18. Does the person vomit or regurgitate on a regular basis? (Not applicable to infants under 12 months of age.) Tick Yes if they vomit or regurgitate food, drink or medication more than once per day or on a regular basis; they take anti-reflux medication; or they clear their throat often or burp often.

Question 19. Does the person drool or dribble saliva when resting or eating or drinking? Tick Yes if the person drools or dribbles saliva at rest or mealtimes, or their clothes or protective napkins or bibs frequently need changing because of drooling.

Question 20. Does food or drink fall out of the person's mouth during eating or drinking? Tick Yes if they are unable to close their mouth and this causes food, drink or medication to fall out; they cannot keep their head upright and food, drink or medication falls out of their mouth; their tongue pushes food, drink or medication out of their mouth; or their mouth continuously needs to be wiped or they need to wear a cloth to protect their clothes during mealtime. Note that this question does not relate to the person's manual dexterity or ability to place food in their mouth.

Question 21. If the person eats independently, do they overfill their mouth or try to eat very quickly? Tick Yes if they eat independently and they try to cram or stuff their mouth before attempting to chew or swallow; they try to swallow too much food before they have chewed it properly; or they usually finish all of their main meal in less than 5 minutes.

Question 22. Does the person appear to eat without chewing? (Does not apply to people on a puree diet.) Tick Yes if they suck their food instead of chewing; the food remains in the mouth for a long period of time before swallowing; or they swallow their food whole without chewing.

Question 23. Does the person take a long time to eat their meals? Tick Yes if they eat independently and take more than 30 minutes to eat meals; they are dependent on someone to feed them and it takes a long time to feed them the whole meal; or they appear to tire as the meal progresses and may not finish their meal.

Question 24. Does the person show distress during or after eating or drinking? Tick Yes if they appear distressed while they eat or drink; they appear distressed immediately after or shortly after eating or drinking; or sometimes while distressed they refuse food or spit out food.

What to do with the result

If you answered yes to one or more of the above questions, the participant might have a nutrition risk or risk to safe swallowing. Make contact with a speech pathologist or medical practitioner if a mealtime management plan is not already in place.

Version: 1
